DBMERGE(1)			  User Commands 		      DBMERGE(1)

NAME
       dbmerge - combine per-volume sumtag databases into one

SYNOPSIS
       dbmerge --database TARGET [-n, --dry-run] [--progress] [--allow-mixed]
       SOURCE...

DESCRIPTION
       dbmerge folds any number of per-volume sumtag(1) databases into one
       TARGET, so that cross-volume dedupe(1) and grouper(1) runs have the
       single database they consume. The sumtag schema was always multi-volume
       (the mountpoints table exists so one database can describe files across
       many filesystems); one database per volume is an operational choice that
       buys parallel scanning, SQLite being a single-writer store.  dbmerge
       closes the loop: the per-volume databases stay the scanning targets, and
       the merged database is a rebuildable analysis artifact, re-merged
       whenever the sources move on (after a rescan, or after sumtag --prune-all
       reconciles a source).

       Each SOURCE is opened read-only, always, and is never modified. It is an
       experimental companion to sumtag(1) and never computes a checksum: only
       the mountpoints and files tables flow, always from source to target.

REPLACE PER MOUNTPOINT
       For each mountpoint present in a source, the target's existing rows for
       that mountpoint are deleted and the source's rows inserted fresh. A row-
       level upsert would carry updates over but never remove target rows whose
       source rows were pruned — the merged database would accumulate ghost rows
       forever. Replacement makes the merge idempotent and each source
       authoritative for its own mountpoints, including an empty one: a source
       mountpoint with zero rows still clears the target's rows for it. Target
       mountpoints no source mentions are left untouched, so one volume can be
       re-merged without feeding all of them.

       The corollary is the collision refusal: the same mountpoint path recorded
       in two sources is an error, because the second source's replacement would
       delete the first's just-merged rows. Sources must partition by mountpoint
       — exactly what one database per volume produces. This doubles as the
       guard against silently interleaving two different filesystems recorded
       under one mount path.

WHAT IS NEVER COPIED
       grouper(1)'s derived tables (dirs, dir_files, dir_pairs, groups,
       group_dirs, grouper_meta) are never copied — dir_files references
       files.rowid, which the merge renumbers — and any such artifacts already
       in the target are dropped, with an announcement: a merge that changed the
       files table has invalidated them. Rerun grouper --prep on the merged
       database; grouper --clean-db reclaims the space if it matters. The
       prescan_summary row is neither copied nor touched: it describes a
       filesystem walk, which the merge does not invalidate.

SAFETY CHECKS
       All before the target is opened for writing:

       •  every source must exist and carry the sumtag tables;

       •  the target may not also be a source, and no source may be given twice
	  (checked after realpath resolution, so symbolic links cannot disguise
	  an overlap);

       •  the same mountpoint path in two sources is refused (see above);

       •  a merged corpus spanning more than one digest algorithm — across the
	  sources plus whatever target rows survive the merge — is refused
	  without --allow-mixed: digests only compare within one algorithm, so
	  cross-algorithm duplicates silently fail to match.

OPTIONS
       --database TARGET
	      The merged database to write. Created if missing (but not under
	      --dry-run).  Existing mountpoints not named by any source are left
	      untouched.  Required.

       -n, --dry-run
	      Report what would be merged — per-mountpoint would merge lines
	      with row counts, would replace, would drop — without writing
	      anything. The target is opened read-only if it exists and is not
	      created if it does not.

       --progress
	      Show one aggregate progress bar on stderr covering all sources:
	      rows-merged/rows-total with rate, percent, elapsed, and ETA. The
	      denominator is counted up front (one cheap COUNT per source).
	      Follows sumtag's conventions: opt-in, appears once the run has
	      taken 2 seconds, redrawn in place, cleared on completion,
	      suppressed when stderr is not a terminal.

       --allow-mixed
	      Proceed even when the merged corpus would span more than one
	      digest algorithm.

OUTPUT
       One announcement per mountpoint before its rows stream across (merge path
       (N rows from SOURCE)), then the house summary block: merge: (rows,
       mountpoints, sources — the headline prints even at zero), replace: and
       drop: when nonzero, then database: and sources:.  Under --dry-run every
       verb gains would.

EXIT STATUS
       0      Nothing to do: no rows merged, none replaced. In practice only
	      empty sources, since replacement always rewrites.

       1      The target was (or, under --dry-run, would be) modified — the
	      normal successful merge.

       2      Errors, or a safety refusal.

       130    Interrupted (Ctrl-C). Commits are per mountpoint, so an
	      interrupted run keeps the mountpoints it completed; the summary
	      printed reflects only committed work.

EXAMPLES
       Merge three per-volume databases into one analysis database:

       dbmerge --database merged.sqlite tank1.sqlite tank2.sqlite tank3.sqlite

       Preview a re-merge of one volume after it was rescanned:

       dbmerge --database merged.sqlite -n tank1.sqlite

       Merge a whole shelf of enclosures with a progress bar:

       dbmerge --database merged.sqlite --progress tank*.sqlite

SEE ALSO
       sumtag(1), grouper(1), dedupe(1)

sumtag 0.1.0			    July 2026			      DBMERGE(1)
