DEDUPE(1)			  User Commands 		       DEDUPE(1)

NAME
       dedupe - delete files from a cull tree that duplicate an actual tree

SYNOPSIS
       dedupe --database DB [--delete] [--allow-mixed] [-n, --offline] ACTUAL
       CULL...

DESCRIPTION
       dedupe dismantles one or more redundant copies of a directory tree.
       ACTUAL is the copy being kept — it is never modified, ever.  Each CULL
       is a redundant copy: every file in it whose digest duplicates a file in
       the corresponding directory of ACTUAL is deleted, regardless of name,
       and directories emptied by this are removed on the way back up. If a
       cull holds three files matching one actual-side witness, all three are
       deleted. What survives in cull is therefore always a signpost —
       something unique, unknown, or suspicious — and the cull root itself
       always survives, even empty, as a placeholder and a receipt.

       More than one CULL may be given: each is walked in sync against the same
       ACTUAL in turn, and the run's counters and summary aggregate across
       them.

       dedupe deletes files. It is an experimental companion to sumtag(1) and
       works from a sumtag SQLite database that already knows both trees; it
       never computes a checksum. A bare run is a full preview (would delete,
       would sweep, would rmdir, with the database opened read-only); actual
       deletion requires the explicit --delete option.

THE SYNCHRONIZED WALK
       Both trees are walked depth-first at the same time, locked in step by
       relative path: while visiting ACTUAL/foo/bar the walk is in CULL/foo/bar,
       and it never descends into a subdirectory name that does not exist as a
       real directory on both sides. Comparison and deletion are therefore flat,
       one directory pair at a time: a cull file dies exactly when a same-digest
       file sits in the corresponding actual directory — same name not required,
       same relative directory required. Reorganised duplicates are out of scope
       by design, in exchange for a comparison that can be verified by looking
       at one directory pair at a time.

       The one exception is the empty-directory carve-out: a cull-side
       subdirectory with no real files anywhere beneath it (only ignorable junk
       files such as .DS_Store, qualifying symbolic links, and empty
       directories) is swept even without an actual-side counterpart — deleting
       it destroys nothing.

WHAT IS DELETED, AND WHAT NEVER IS
       Only plain files positively identified as duplicates are deleted, plus
       the exit junk below, and only ever on the cull side.

       •  Files the database does not know (never stamped or mirrored) are
	  invisible: never matched, never deleted, left in place even if that
	  leaves their directory standing.

       •  Ignorable junk files (.DS_Store) never block a directory's removal,
	  and are swept exactly when they are the last thing standing before the
	  directory is removed — never earlier.

       •  Symbolic links are never followed and never digest-matched. A link is
	  swept at directory exit only if it is relative and points inside the
	  cull tree — where it points is what matters, not whether the target
	  still exists, since the deletion phase has usually just emptied it. An
	  absolute link is never deleted, wherever it points, and neither is any
	  link escaping the cull tree: such a link blocks its directory like any
	  other survivor.

       •  A cull directory containing an @sumtag-ignore marker (see sumtag(1))
	  is fenced off: not descended, nothing inside it deleted, swept, or
	  removed; it blocks its parent like any survivor. A marker on the cull
	  root itself is honoured with a warning, and the run does nothing.

TRUST MODEL
       Stored digests are trusted; neither side is re-hashed. That is defensible
       because deleting a true duplicate is reversible — the actual tree keeps
       the bytes — but it only holds if the stored digests describe the current
       bytes, so three vetoes gate every candidate, none of which read file
       contents:

       •  the database digest must equal the digest in the file's own extended
	  attribute, on both sides;

       •  the file's live mtime must equal the mtime recorded in its extended
	  attribute, on both sides;

       •  the cull file's live size must equal its witness's. XXH3-64 is a
	  64-bit non-cryptographic hash, and the size check is free collision
	  insurance: a digest match with differing sizes is reported loudly as a
	  mismatch, the file is kept, and the run exits 2.

       A cull-side file failing a veto is kept, with a warning; an actual-side
       file failing a veto simply witnesses nothing.

SAFETY CHECKS
       All of the following are verified before anything is at risk:

       •  Every root must exist, and ACTUAL must be disjoint from each cull
	  under realpath(3) — not equal, and neither nested inside the other, so
	  symbolic links cannot disguise an overlap. Culls are not checked
	  against one another: two overlapping culls only cost redundant work,
	  never the copy being kept.

       •  The database must already exist and must know every root: each root's
	  live mount point must be recorded and file rows must be present
	  beneath it. An unmounted drive is an error, never a silent no-match.

       •  If the roots' rows carry more than one digest algorithm across ACTUAL
	  and all the culls, the run is refused unless --allow-mixed is given,
	  because cross-algorithm duplicates would silently survive.

       •  At the moment of deletion, if the cull file and its witness resolve to
	  the same path under realpath(3), they are one directory entry reached
	  through links; the deletion is refused loudly (exit status 2), since
	  deleting “the copy” would delete the only name. The same inode behind
	  different real paths is a genuine hard link — safe to delete, and
	  noted.

       Pass the roots spelled as sumtag scanned them: row lookups use the
       absolute path as given, exactly as sumtag records paths, so a
       differently-spelled root (for example through a symlinked path component)
       fails the must-know-both-roots check with a clear error rather than
       matching nothing.

OFFLINE PREDICTION
       With -n (--offline), dedupe answers “what might be deleted” from the
       database alone: no filesystem access at all, so neither root needs to be
       mounted. The roots are resolved against the stored mount points, the flat
       same-relative-directory match runs over the database rows, and each
       candidate prints as might delete — deliberately not would delete, because
       this is a prediction, not a plan. Everything the filesystem would have
       contributed is skipped: the three trust-model vetoes, the realpath(3)
       identity checks, @sumtag-ignore fences, and all sweep and directory-
       removal predictions (files the database never stamped are invisible, so
       it can never know a directory would empty).  Two row-only checks remain:
       the collision-insurance size comparison, where a --locate run has
       recorded sizes on both sides, and a note when a candidate shares its
       recorded inode with its witness (a hard link or an alias — a live run
       decides which). The bare live preview remains the only exact one.

       The run is announced with an offline: line so a consumer of the
       prediction knows what it is consuming, the database is opened read-only,
       and -n conflicts with --delete — a prediction cannot arm. Exit status is
       unchanged: 1 means candidates were found, 2 covers errors and refusals
       (including a recorded-size mismatch).

OPTIONS
       --database DB
	      Path to the sumtag SQLite database that knows every tree.
	      Required.

       --delete
	      Actually delete. Without it, the run is a complete preview and the
	      database is opened read-only. Deleted files' database rows are
	      removed in the same run, committed per directory, so an
	      interrupted run stays consistent.

       --allow-mixed
	      Proceed even when the roots carry more than one digest algorithm.
	      Cross-algorithm duplicates silently survive; see SAFETY CHECKS
	      above.

       -n, --offline
	      Predict what might be deleted from the database alone, with no
	      filesystem access; neither root needs to be mounted. See OFFLINE
	      PREDICTION above. Conflicts with --delete.

RUN SUMMARY
       Every run ends with a summary block: files deleted (or would-delete) and
       their cumulative size, items swept, directories removed, files kept
       (broken down as unique, unknown, or stale), directories fenced by
       @sumtag-ignore markers, errors, and the database and roots in use.
       Interrupting a run with Ctrl-C prints the same summary, prefixed by an
       interrupted line; the counters cover only completed work, and commits are
       per directory, so the database matches what actually happened.

EXIT STATUS
       0      nothing redundant was found.

       1      duplicates were found (deleted, or would-delete under preview).

       2      errors or a safety refusal prevented a complete, clean run.

       130    the run was interrupted by Ctrl-C (128 + SIGINT, the shell
	      convention).

EXAMPLES
       Preview what dismantling a redundant backup copy would delete:

       dedupe --database /var/lib/sumtag.sqlite /data/proj /backup/proj-old

       Actually delete:

       dedupe --database /var/lib/sumtag.sqlite --delete /data/proj /backup/proj-old

       Predict what might be deleted while the backup drive is unplugged:

       dedupe --database /var/lib/sumtag.sqlite -n /data/proj /backup/proj-old

       Dismantle several redundant copies against one kept tree in a single
       run:

       dedupe --database /var/lib/sumtag.sqlite --delete /data/proj \
	   /backup/proj-old /mnt/archive/proj-2024

NOTES
       dedupe is experimental — and it is the dangerous companion: always
       preview first. Both trees should be freshly stamped (sumtag --sum
       --database ...) before a run, so the trust-model vetoes have current
       metadata to check against; stale stamps cause files to be kept, never
       wrongly deleted.

SEE ALSO
       sumtag(1), grouper(1)

AUTHOR
       The sumtag authors.

sumtag 0.1.0			    July 2026			       DEDUPE(1)
