GROUPER(1)			  User Commands 		      GROUPER(1)

NAME
       grouper - find groups of directories with identical or similar contents
       in a sumtag database

SYNOPSIS
       grouper --database DB [ACTION] [OPTIONS]

DESCRIPTION
       grouper is an experimental companion program to sumtag(1).  It reads the
       files/mountpoints tables of a sumtag SQLite database and finds groups of
       directories whose contents are identical or nearly so — for example, two
       slightly different copies of the same project, or the five scattered
       backups of a family video archive. It never touches files, extended
       attributes, or anything else on disk: everything it knows comes from the
       database, and everything it builds (its derived tables) lives inside the
       same database file.

       --database is required on every invocation. With no action flags, the
       stored grouping is printed (see THE REPORT). Building that grouping is a
       three-stage pipeline, each stage persisted so later stages are cheap to
       re-run:

       --index
	      Stage 1: distill the file table into the distinct directories that
	      directly contain at least one visible stamped file. Direct
	      children only, deliberately: a directory's own file listing is its
	      signature. Two junk filters apply, each reporting its dropped
	      count on standard error: a directory whose path contains a hidden
	      (dot-prefixed) component — .git/hooks, .build/checkouts, anything
	      under .Trash-* — is never indexed at all, and a directory whose
	      direct files are all hidden is dropped.  --no-junk-filter disables
	      both.

       --pairs
	      Stage 2: compare every directory to every other with the selected
	      comparison function and store every nonzero similarity. This N²/2
	      comparison is the expensive part, so the similarity threshold is
	      deliberately not applied here — regrouping at a different
	      threshold recomputes nothing.

       --threshold X
	      Stage 3: walk the stored pairs best-first and partition
	      directories into groups, taking X (0.0-1.0) as the similar-enough
	      bar. Pairs of equal similarity are walked in order of the number
	      of files they share (stored with each pair at --pairs time), so at
	      the same score two big matching archives seed a group ahead of two
	      matching three-file folders. Each directory gets exactly one
	      placement decision and groups never merge, so the result is a true
	      partition.  The grouping is persisted, and the run ends with the
	      report. If the stored grouping is already current for this
	      threshold, the rebuild is skipped.

       --prep runs stages 1 and 2 together, and stages combine freely in one
       invocation (--prep --threshold 0.7).  An interrupted --pairs keeps its
       completed work, but its provenance row is written only on success, so a
       partial pair table is refused by --threshold rather than silently grouped
       from.

OPTIONS
       --database DB
	      Path to the sumtag SQLite database. Required.

       --prep Stages 1+2: --index then --pairs.

       --index
	      Stage 1 alone: (re)build the directory index. Silent on success.

       --no-junk-filter
	      Disable --index's junk filtering for the run: directories under
	      hidden path components and all-hidden directories are indexed like
	      any other. The escape hatch for deliberately grouping hidden trees
	      — for example, asking whether trash contents are duplicated
	      elsewhere before emptying the trash. The filtering regime the
	      index was built under is recorded in the database.

       --pairs
	      Stage 2 alone: score and store directory pairs. Silent on success.

       --threshold X
	      Stage 3: build and persist the grouping at similarity bar X, then
	      report it. Refused if X is below the pair table's stored --min-sim
	      floor (the stored pairs could not answer honestly).

       --fn NAME
	      Comparison function for --pairs/--compare.  One of: digest
	      (content only — renames are free), name-digest (all-or-nothing per
	      name-and-digest pair), or name-score (the default; name-anchored
	      partial credit: one point for a shared basename, two more if the
	      digests also agree).

       --jobs N
	      Worker processes for --pairs scoring (default: all CPUs); 1
	      disables multiprocessing. Each worker loads its own full copy of
	      the signature table, so on a big corpus this is a memory knob as
	      much as a speed knob. The stored pair set is identical at any
	      value.

       --progress
	      Live progress bar on standard error for the build stages,
	      following the sumtag(1) conventions: appears once a stage has run
	      two seconds, redrawn in place, cleared on completion, suppressed
	      when standard error is not a terminal.  Shows work items
	      done/total with rate, percentage, elapsed time, and ETA.

       --max-df N
	      For --pairs: instead of exhaustive all-pairs, score only candidate
	      pairs sharing at least one signature token (basename or digest,
	      per the comparison function) present in at most N directories.
	      Nominated pairs get exact scores — the cap governs who gets looked
	      at, never what a look sees; what is lost is only pairs whose sole
	      overlap is ubiquitous tokens, whose similarity is necessarily
	      tiny. By default, exhaustive comparison is used up to roughly ten
	      thousand directories, then candidate nomination with N=1000; 0
	      forces exhaustive at any size. Candidate mode is announced on
	      standard error and recorded in the database.

       --min-sim X
	      For --pairs: store only pairs scoring at least X (0.0-1.0). By
	      default every nonzero pair is stored, which keeps --threshold a
	      free exploratory knob — but on an archive-scale corpus the weak
	      tail dwarfs everything interesting. The floor governs what is
	      kept, never what is looked at; it is recorded in the database, and
	      a later --threshold below it is refused with a rerun hint.

       --name For --pairs/--compare: two directories whose basenames differ
	      score 0, unconditionally — only same-named directories can pair,
	      and therefore group. The typical prey is versioned copies of one
	      tree (proj/, backup/proj/, old/proj/), where the directory's own
	      name survives a copy even as contents drift. Also sharply reduces
	      what --pairs stores.

       --sort KEY
	      Order for the report's groups. One of: bond (default) — creation
	      order, strongest bonds first; files — each group's total stamped-
	      file count, largest first; size — each group's total byte size,
	      largest first; tree-size — like size but over each member
	      directory's entire subtree. See THE REPORT.

       --ls DIR
	      List the files the index records for one directory (absolute or
	      mount-relative path).

       --compare DIR_A DIR_B
	      Print the similarity (0.0-1.0) of two directories' contents under
	      the selected comparison function.

       --dupes
	      Report duplicate files (same digest) across the whole database —
	      files, not directories.

       --top [N]
	      Report the N (default 1) most frequently occurring checksums and
	      their files, excluding empty files.

       --min N
	      For --dupes/--top: only report groups of at least N files (default
	      2).

       --clean-db
	      Drop every grouper-owned derived table and VACUUM, returning their
	      space — dir_pairs in particular can dwarf the sumtag tables it was
	      derived from. All-or-nothing on purpose: the artifacts are
	      interdependent, so a partial clean would leave a grouping that
	      cannot be reported. Sumtag's own tables are never touched.  Cannot
	      be combined with any other action.

THE REPORT
       The report opens with the grouping's provenance (comparison function,
       threshold, build time), then prints each group with its member
       directories:

       group 17  (2 directories, 1852 files, 908.4GiB in tree, avg 454.2GiB/dir, best pair 1.000)
	   /mnt/backup/recovered/media
	   /mnt/backup/master/media

       best pair is the highest stored similarity between any two members — the
       bond that says how alike the group is at its closest point. Members are
       listed alphabetically by path.

       --sort is display-time only: nothing is stored or rebuilt, and group
       numbering does not change. The default bond order lists groups in
       creation order, strongest bonds first. The files, size, and tree-size
       orders list the largest groups first and add each group's file count,
       byte total, and average bytes per member directory (avg .../dir, the byte
       total divided by the member count) to its header line.  size counts the
       member directories' direct children — the same files the similarity was
       scored over — while tree-size rolls up each member's entire subtree
       (marked in tree in the header): members nested under another member of
       the same group are skipped so nothing is double-counted, and the totals
       include stamped files the index itself never looked at (hidden files,
       dropped junk directories).  Under tree-size, the same bytes can
       legitimately appear in several groups' totals, so report-wide sums are
       not meaningful.

       Byte totals read the size column that a sumtag --locate run populates. If
       some files lack sizes, the report proceeds with a note on standard error
       that totals undercount; if all do, a size sort is refused outright rather
       than producing a silently meaningless ordering.

EXAMPLES
       Build everything and group at a moderate similarity bar, in one
       invocation:

       grouper --database /var/lib/sumtag.sqlite --prep --threshold 0.7

       Tighten the grouping to near-identical directories only. The expensive
       pair table is already stored, so this regroups in seconds and recomputes
       nothing:

       grouper --database /var/lib/sumtag.sqlite --threshold 0.9999

       Print the stored grouping again, touching nothing:

       grouper --database /var/lib/sumtag.sqlite

       The space-hunting view: the same grouping ordered by each group's total
       subtree size, so the report leads with the largest duplicated trees —
       typically worth capturing to a file:

       grouper --database /var/lib/sumtag.sqlite --sort tree-size > groups.out

       Rebuild the pair table on an archive-scale corpus: candidate nomination
       (share a token seen in at most 1000 directories), keep only pairs scoring
       at least 0.5, cap worker memory at four processes, and watch progress:

       grouper --database big.sqlite --pairs --max-df 1000 \
	   --min-sim 0.5 --jobs 4 --progress

       Ask why (or how much) two specific directories resemble each other, and
       see what the index recorded for one of them:

       grouper --database db.sqlite --compare /mnt/a/proj /mnt/b/proj
       grouper --database db.sqlite --ls /mnt/a/proj

       Duplicate files rather than directories — every digest shared by at least
       three files, then the ten most frequent checksums:

       grouper --database db.sqlite --dupes --min 3
       grouper --database db.sqlite --top 10

       Content-only grouping, so wholesale renames still match:

       grouper --database db.sqlite --pairs --fn digest
       grouper --database db.sqlite --threshold 0.9

       Rebuild everything with junk filtering off, to ask whether hidden trees
       (here, trash contents) are duplicated elsewhere:

       grouper --database db.sqlite --no-junk-filter --prep --threshold 0.9

       Prepare a very large corpus, keeping only meaningful pairs between same-
       named directories:

       grouper --database big.sqlite --prep --name --min-sim 0.4 --progress

       Return the space the derived tables occupy:

       grouper --database foo.sqlite --clean-db

EXIT STATUS
       0 on success; 1 if an error prevented the request from being answered
       (not a sumtag database, no stored pairs or grouping yet, a --threshold
       below the stored --min-sim floor, or a size sort with no stored sizes).

CAVEATS
       The derived tables are snapshots: when sumtag rescans and the file table
       changes, rerun the pipeline (--prep, then --threshold).	The report
       prints a note when the pair table is newer than the stored grouping, and
       when the directory index is newer than the pair table (for example, after
       reindexing under a different junk-filtering regime). The index references
       file rows by SQLite rowid, which VACUUM can renumber — acceptable for
       artifacts rebuilt in one command.

       The database must have been populated by sumtag(1) first (e.g.  sumtag
       --database db.sqlite --sum --locate /data); byte totals in the report
       additionally want the stat metadata a --locate pass records.

SEE ALSO
       sumtag(1), dedupe(1)

AUTHOR
       The sumtag authors.

sumtag 0.1.0			    July 2026			      GROUPER(1)
