SUMTAG(1)                        User Commands                       SUMTAG(1)

NAME
       sumtag - stamp files with an XXH3 checksum and metadata for corruption
       and duplicate detection

SYNOPSIS
       sumtag [OPTIONS] DIRECTORY [DIRECTORY...]

DESCRIPTION
       sumtag recursively scans each DIRECTORY, computes an XXH3 checksum of
       every file's contents, and stores the checksum together with metadata
       in an extended attribute named user.sumtag on the file. The recorded
       metadata makes it possible to later detect silent data corruption and
       to find duplicate files. Those higher-level analyses are left to other
       tools, with one exception built in here: the single-pass integrity
       check offered by --verify.

       An explicit action option is required: every run must name what it does
       with one of --sum, --verify, --remove, --import, --locate,
       --prune-dirs, or --prune-all.  A bare sumtag DIRECTORY is an error. The
       plain stamping action is --sum, which works with or without a database
       (see OPTIONS).

       At least one DIRECTORY is also required; there is no current-directory
       default. Any operation that scans a directory requires an explicit
       directory argument, so that a recursive operation is never aimed at the
       working directory by omission. Pass .  explicitly to scan the current
       directory.

       For each file, sumtag reads any existing user.sumtag attribute and
       compares the recorded modification time to the file's current mtime. If
       they match, the file is considered up to date and is skipped.
       Otherwise the file's contents are hashed and the attribute is written.

       Within each directory, files are processed in ascending alphabetical
       order and subdirectories are then recursed into in the same order, so
       the processing order can be followed against an ls(1) listing. This
       holds in every mode.

       Symbolic links are not content: a symlink encountered during traversal
       is never followed, hashed, stamped, verified, or removed, in any mode.
       A DIRECTORY named on the command line may itself be a symbolic link,
       which is honoured; nothing found beneath it is followed.

RE-HASHING
       A file is hashed, or re-hashed, when any of the following hold:

       o  the --force option was given;

       o  the user.sumtag attribute is absent or unreadable;

       o  the stored modification time is older than the file's current mtime;

       o  the stored schema version has a lower major number than the running
          software.

       Freshness is algorithm-agnostic: a file with any current digest,
       regardless of which algorithm produced it, counts as up to date. A
       stored digest is never recomputed merely because a different algorithm
       is now preferred; when a re-hash does happen for one of the reasons
       above, it replaces the file's single stored digest rather than keeping
       the old one alongside it.

OPTIONS
       -n, --dry-run
              Scan and report what would be done, but write nothing -- no
              extended attributes and no database rows. Output matches a real
              run. Cannot be combined with --force.

       -q, --quiet
              Suppress normal output. Repeat (-qq) to also suppress error
              messages on standard error. Mutually exclusive with --verbose.

       -v, --verbose
              Explain the decision made for each file, including skips.
              Without this option, each file touched is announced by its bare
              path alone. Repeat (-vv) for deep internal detail intended for
              debugging. Mutually exclusive with --quiet.

       --progress
              Show a live within-file progress indicator for large files. If
              it appears together with -q, whichever option appears last on
              the command line wins, and a warning is printed to standard
              error. The indicator's line shows the file's size, the current
              hashing rate, a bar, the percentage complete, elapsed time, and
              an ETA, e.g.:
              99.3GiB   40.1MiB/s  [===============>     ]  84%   0:05:12  ETA 58s

              The bar is the only field whose width varies: it absorbs
              whatever room the fixed-width fields leave, and resizes live
              when the terminal window is resized.

       --si   Display --progress sizes and rates using decimal (SI, powers-
              of-1000: kB/MB/GB) units instead of the default binary (powers-
              of-1024: KiB/MiB/GiB) units.

       -f, --force
              Re-hash every file unconditionally, ignoring any existing
              metadata. Cannot be combined with --dry-run or --verify.
              Combined with --import or --locate, overrides their default
              refusal to compute (see below). This option does not override
              @sumtag-ignore markers; use --no-ignore for that.

       --database VALUE
              Name a database to act on.  VALUE is a SQLite file path, or a
              scheme:// DSN. A value matching the pattern `^[a-z][a-
              z0-9+.-]*://' is treated as a DSN (mysql://, postgresql://); any
              other value, including one that merely contains a colon, is a
              SQLite file path. Only SQLite is implemented; a DSN is
              recognised and rejected as not yet supported. Database paths are
              stored relative to the file's mount point so they survive
              remounting at a different location.  --database takes no action
              by itself; it requires at least one of --sum, --import,
              --locate, --prune-dirs, or --prune-all to say what to do with
              it.

       --sum  The stamping action: hash or re-hash each file per the normal
              mtime-based decision (see RE-HASHING ) and write the extended
              attribute. With --database, the result is additionally mirrored
              into the database; without one, only the extended attribute is
              written.

       --import
              Do not compute any checksum by default; only copy metadata
              already present in each file's extended attribute into the
              database. Requires --database.  Files lacking usable metadata
              are skipped and reported. Useful for populating a database from
              an archive that was hashed on a previous run. Combined with
              --force, computes and mirrors every file instead of only
              propagating what already exists. Combined with --sum, is
              redundant (the normal decision already computes and mirrors) but
              not an error. Cannot be combined with --verify.

       --locate
              Stat every file visited and write filesystem metadata (size,
              permissions, ownership, link count, device, and timestamps) to
              the database, regardless of whether xattr work was done. Implies
              --import: existing extended-attribute metadata is propagated as
              well, so --locate alone does everything --import alone would,
              plus stat columns. Requires --database.  Combined with --force,
              computes checksums for every file too, the same override
              --import accepts. Useful as a periodic filesystem inventory pass
              (analogous to updatedb).

       --verify
              Read-only integrity check: recompute each file's checksum and
              compare it to the stored value, reporting any disagreement.
              Nothing is written, even on a mismatch. A mismatch while the
              stored modification time still matches the file's mtime
              indicates silent corruption; a mismatch accompanied by a newer
              mtime indicates an ordinary modification whose stamp is merely
              stale. Files with no usable metadata are reported as
              unverifiable. Cannot be combined with --database, --sum,
              --import, --locate, or --force; combining with --dry-run is a
              redundant no-op and is permitted. See EXIT STATUS below.

       --remove
              Remove the user.sumtag xattr from every file in the tree. A
              testing/reset utility, not a data-integrity primitive: no mtime
              comparison, no hashing, just an unconditional delete of whatever
              attribute happens to be present. Files with no attribute are
              left alone. Combined with --dry-run, previews which files would
              lose their stamp without removing anything. Cannot be combined
              with --database, --sum, --import, --locate, --verify, or
              --force.

       --prescan
              Walk the tree once up front to count the files that will be
              checksummed and their total size, then prefix each hash/verify
              announcement with an nnn/mmm file counter and a bytes-so-
              far/total counter, e.g.:
              042/137  118.2MiB/4.2GiB  hash /backup/vault/photo0042.dng (reason)
       The counted set mirrors whichever mode is running: for the normal
       hash/stamp pass it is the files the re-hash decision (or --force) will
       actually hash; for --verify it is every file with a usable stored
       digest. During the counting walk each directory visited is announced
       before any file metadata inside it is read (the bare directory path, or
       prescan path with -v; suppressed by -q), so the otherwise-silent up-
       front pass shows its own progress on a large tree. The prescan pass is
       a prediction from a separate walk, not a guarantee -- counts can drift
       if the tree changes between the two passes. On a --database run (and
       not under -n), the counted totals are also stored in the database as
       its single prescan summary, replacing any previous one; that summary is
       what --db-prescan later consumes. Cannot be combined with --remove.

       --db-prescan
              Like --prescan, but load the counters' totals from the summary a
              previous --prescan --database run stored, instead of walking the
              filesystem -- on a very large tree this replaces an hours-long
              counting walk with a database read. The stored totals are used
              only if they were counted for the same scan roots (compared
              after path normalization) and under the same counting options
              (--sum/--import/--locate, --force, --exclude, --no-ignore); a
              missing or non-matching summary is an error before any work
              begins (exit status 2), never a silent fall-back to a filesystem
              walk. What was loaded is announced at startup. The progress
              report is an approximation by consent: the per-file counter
              tracks what actually happens this run, so it may overshoot the
              stored total (the tree changed) or the run may finish below it
              (some of the counted work was already done -- the typical case
              when resuming an interrupted scan). The stored data is display-
              only and never influences which files are hashed. Requires
              --database; cannot be combined with --prescan or --remove.

       --prune-dirs
              Reconcile the database with a changed filesystem: collect every
              directory the database knows under the given roots (the
              distinct parent directories of its file rows), check each one
              with a single stat(2), and delete the rows of directories that
              no longer exist. A deleted directory takes exactly its resident
              file rows with it; nothing is deleted recursively, because a
              vanished subdirectory is discovered by its own check -- every
              known directory is in the list. The filesystem is never
              modified. Each DIRECTORY named on the command line must exist
              -- a missing root is an error (exit status 2) before the
              database is even opened, so an unmounted drive can never read
              as a mass deletion -- and only rows recorded under the root's
              current mount point are candidates. The DIRECTORY argument is
              therefore not what is scanned (the walk is over the database);
              it is the operation's safety scope. Naming a root that exists
              is the evidence that the filesystem its rows describe is
              actually mounted and live, and it confines the reconciliation
              to that subtree -- so a database that mirrors several drives
              can be pruned one drive at a time while the others sit
              unplugged. The database itself must already exist; it is never
              created by this option. A directory
              deleted from the filesystem but moved elsewhere is pruned at
              its old location like any other deletion; files deleted from a
              directory that still exists are not noticed (that is
              --prune-all's job). Combined with --dry-run, previews what
              would be pruned without deleting anything. With --progress, a
              live nnn/mmm counter reports directories checked against the
              total known at the start.  Requires --database.  Cannot be
              combined with --sum, --import, --locate, --verify, --remove,
              --force, --prescan, --db-prescan, --exclude, or --no-ignore
              (the last two govern filesystem traversal, and this option
              walks the database, not the filesystem). See EXIT STATUS below.

       --prune-all
              Everything --prune-dirs does, and additionally check every file
              row in directories that still exist, with one lstat(2) each,
              deleting the rows of files that no longer exist or are no
              longer regular files (a path that turned into a directory or
              symbolic link is not the stamped file). The directory pass runs
              first, so a vanished directory still costs a single stat(2),
              never one per resident row; the extra cost over --prune-dirs is
              one lstat(2) per row in surviving directories only. A moved
              file is pruned at its old location like any deletion; nothing
              content-based is checked -- no hashing, ever. Same
              requirements, conflicts, previews, progress counter (the unit
              becomes paths: directories plus file rows), and exit status as
              --prune-dirs; giving both together is redundant but not an
              error.

       --no-ignore
              Disregard all @sumtag-ignore marker files for this run,
              processing every directory regardless of markers.  This option
              governs markers only; it has no effect on --exclude.

       --exclude PATTERN
              Skip any file or directory whose name matches the shell glob
              PATTERN.  Matching is against the basename only, case-
              sensitively; a matching directory is pruned along with its
              entire subtree, exactly as an @sumtag-ignore marker would prune
              it. May be repeated; a name matching any given pattern is
              excluded. The exclusion applies in every mode, is not overridden
              by --force, and is unaffected by --no-ignore, which governs
              markers only. A DIRECTORY named on the command line whose own
              name matches a pattern is skipped, with a warning printed to
              standard error.

       --version
              Print version information and exit.

       -h, --help
              Print a usage summary and exit.

IGNORE MARKERS
       A directory containing a file named @sumtag-ignore is exempted along
       with its entire subtree: sumtag does not descend into it, and nothing
       beneath it is read, hashed, stamped, or mirrored to a database. The
       marker file itself is never hashed. Only the file's presence matters;
       its contents are ignored and reserved for future use. The exemption
       applies in every mode and takes precedence over --force; use
       --no-ignore to override it. A marker found at a directory named
       directly on the command line is honoured, with a warning printed to
       standard error.

       For per-run exclusion from the command line, without placing a marker
       file, see --exclude.

RUN SUMMARY
       Every run ends with a brief summary block on standard output
       (suppressed by -q): the number of files the mode processed and their
       cumulative size (headlined hashed, would hash, imported, verified,
       removed, or pruned to match the mode; pruned counts directories and
       file rows, followed by a checked line with the total directories
       examined -- under --prune-all, files too), any nonzero skipped,
       errors, CORRUPT, stale, or
       unverifiable counts, the database in use (when --database was given),
       and the scanned directories. Byte figures honour --si.

       Interrupting a run with Ctrl-C prints the same summary, prefixed by an
       interrupted line, instead of a Python traceback; the counters cover
       only files whose work had already completed. The process then exits 130
       (128 + SIGINT, the shell convention).

EXIT STATUS
       Without --verify, --prune-dirs, or --prune-all, sumtag exits 0 on
       success and non-zero if an error prevented completion.

       With --verify:

       0      all checked files verified intact.

       1      one or more checksum mismatches (corruption) were found.

       2      unreadable files or other errors prevented a complete check.

       With --prune-dirs or --prune-all, the same scheme, applied to
       staleness: 0 means nothing was stale (the database already matches the
       filesystem), 1 means stale directories or file rows were found and
       pruned (or would be pruned, under --dry-run), and 2 means errors
       prevented a complete check (including a missing scan root or
       database).

       In any mode, a run interrupted by Ctrl-C exits 130 (see RUN SUMMARY).

FILES
       user.sumtag
              Extended attribute holding each file's checksum and metadata as
              UTF-8 JSON.

       @sumtag-ignore
              Marker file that exempts its directory and subtree (see IGNORE
              MARKERS).

EXAMPLES
       Stamp the current directory:

       sumtag --sum .

       Stamp two archives:

       sumtag --sum /data /backup

       Preview without writing anything:

       sumtag --sum -n /data

       Stamp and also mirror into a SQLite database:

       sumtag --database /var/lib/sumtag.sqlite --sum /data

       Import existing metadata into a database without re-reading files:

       sumtag --database /var/lib/sumtag.sqlite --import /data

       Take a filesystem inventory pass, capturing stat metadata alongside any
       existing checksums:

       sumtag --database /var/lib/sumtag.sqlite --locate /data

       Verify an archive against its stored checksums:

       sumtag --verify /backup

       Resume an interrupted database run without repeating its hour-long
       counting walk, reusing the totals the interrupted run's --prescan
       stored:

       sumtag --sum --database /var/lib/sumtag.sqlite --db-prescan /data

       Stamp an archive, skipping DVD rip payloads:

       sumtag --sum --exclude '*.vob' --exclude VIDEO_TS /data

       After deleting directories from an archive, drop their stale database
       rows (previewing first):

       sumtag --prune-dirs -n --database /var/lib/sumtag.sqlite /data
       sumtag --prune-dirs --database /var/lib/sumtag.sqlite /data

NOTES
       Timestamps are recorded in UTC with microsecond precision. Mtime
       comparisons truncate both the stored and live values to the same
       precision, so the comparison is symmetric.

SEE ALSO
       xattr(1), getfattr(1), setfattr(1), cksum(1)

AUTHOR
       The sumtag authors.

sumtag 0.1.0                       June 2026                         SUMTAG(1)
